DOC-2026: AI Premium Plugin Documentation (#2819)
tinymce/tinymce-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/ai.adoc

= AI Assistant plugin
:navtitle: AI
:description: Sends queries to registered AI APIs and sets the results in the document or temporarily stores the results for later use.
:description_short: Query AI APIs and accept results.
:keywords: plugin, ai, artificial intelligence, query, search.
:pluginname: AI Assistant
:plugincode: ai
:plugincategory: premium

include::partial$misc/admon-ai-pricing.adoc[]

include::partial$misc/admon-requires-6.6v.adoc[]

The {pluginname} allows a {productname} document to send queries to registered AI APIs and either:

. add the returned results to a document; or

> . temporarily store the returned results for later use.

Reviewer: Is this statement accurate @MitchCTiny , as the returned result is only stored while the editor instance is active, and not retrievable after the editor instance is closed.

> temporarily store the returned results for later use.

Reviewer 2: The results will be discarded on closing the editor and can't retrieved later

Reviewer 2: Need to update the `:description` field as well

Author: See [this commit](https://github.com/tinymce/tinymce-docs/commit/bfcd5b106b89d76dc63174364ab46ba650ca9e11) for the re-write that covers this.

[IMPORTANT]
.On the absence of an AI Assistant demo
====
This initial release of the AI Assistant developer documentation does not include an in-page working demo.

The logistics of setting up such a demo are still being investigated.

When a solution that is both useful and workable is found, it will replace this notice.
====

== Basic setup

To add the {pluginname} plugin to the editor, add both `{plugincode}` to the `plugins` option in the editor configuration and the `ai_request` function to the editor configuration.

For example:

[source,js]
----
tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'ai',
  toolbar: 'aidialog aishortcuts',

>   ai_request: (request) => new Promise()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ai_request: (request, respondWith) => { }
```

Reviewer 2: The correct return type of ai_request is void

});
----

[IMPORTANT]
.Default strings added to all prompts
====
The {pluginname} automatically appends default strings to all prompts.

Depending on the prompt, the added string will be one of the following:

[source,text]
----
Answer the question based on the context below.
The response should be in HTML format.
The response should preserve any HTML formatting, links, and styles in the context.
----

These added strings both improve the UX and increase the response accuracy.

> However, these added strings do increase token use.

Reviewer 2: The HTML format also increases the token use

Author: To quote my [commit message](https://github.com/tinymce/tinymce-docs/commit/130d03ba3d164763fa850050240b30049d5f0393):

> Added note regarding html format increasing token use.

:pluginname: AI Assistant
:plugincode: ai
:plugincategory: premium

include::partial$misc/admon-ai-pricing.adoc[]

include::partial$misc/admon-requires-6.6v.adoc[]

The {pluginname} plugin allows a user to interact with registered AI APIs by sending queries and viewing responses within a {productname} editor dialog.

Once a response is generated and displayed within the dialog, the user can choose to either:

. insert it into the editor at the current selection;
. create another query to further refine the response generated by the AI; or
. close the dialog and discard the returned response.

Users can retrieve a history of their conversations with the AI using the xref:#getThreadLog[`getThreadLog` API], including any discarded responses.

[IMPORTANT]
.On the absence of an {pluginname} demo
====
This initial release of the {pluginname} developer documentation does not include an in-page working demo.
====

== Basic setup

To add the {pluginname} plugin to the editor, add both `{plugincode}` to the `plugins` option in the editor configuration and the `ai_request` function to the editor configuration.

For example, interfacing with the OpenAI Completions API:

[source,js]
----

> const api_key = '<INSERT_API_KEY_HERE>';

Reviewer 3: We can link this part to the reference proxy docs to show integrators how to hide the api value

once the ref repo is merged, this should be the correct link
https://github.com/tinymce/openai-proxy-reference-implementation/config/openai.rego

The docs will provide a step through of how this all comes together
https://github.com/tinymce/openai-proxy-reference-implementation/docs/

> const api_key = '<INSERT_API_KEY_HERE>';

Reviewer 3: The key points to note are:
- The OpenAI API key is never checked into source control
- The OpenAI API key is never visible to end users on a public site.
The proxy achieves this by only accessing the API key from an environment variable.

  toolbar: 'aidialog aishortcuts',
  ai_request: (request, respondWith) => {
    const openAiOptions = {
      method: 'POST',
      headers: {
        'Content-Type': 'application/json',
        'Authorization': `Bearer ${api_key}`
      },
      body: JSON.stringify({
        model: 'gpt-3.5-turbo',
        temperature: 0.7,
        max_tokens: 800,
        messages: [{ role: 'user', content: request.prompt }],
      })
    };
    respondWith.string((signal) => window.fetch('https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions', { signal, ...openAiOptions })
      .then(async (response) => {
        if (response.ok) {
          return response.json();
        } else {
          return Promise.reject(`Failed to communicate with the OpenAI API. ${await response.text()}`);
        }
      })
      .then((data) =>
        data.error
        ? Promise.reject(`Failed to communicate with the ChatGPT API because of ${data.error.type} error: ${data.error.message}`)
        : data)
      .then((data) =>
        // Extract the response content from the data returned by the API
        data?.choices[0]?.message?.content?.trim()
      )
    );
  }
});
----

== Using a proxy server with {pluginname}

> A proxy server can provide flexibility by allowing extra processing before the request is sent to an LLM AI endpoint and before returning the response to the user.

Reviewer 4: This is *not* why you should use a proxy service. You should use it because the [OpenAI Best Practices](https://help.openai.com/en/articles/5112595-best-practices-for-api-key-safety) make it very clear you should do so, and failing to do so exposes your organisation to financial and service uptime risks (when whoever walked off with your API key exhausts your quota).

Author: [Material added](https://github.com/tinymce/tinymce-docs/commit/8e2cc2f8c595f4d56549c0356d568374b3713388).

Users can retrieve a history of their conversations with the AI using the xref:#getThreadLog[`getThreadLog` API], including any discarded responses.

[IMPORTANT]
.On the absence of an {pluginname} demo
====
This initial release of the {pluginname} developer documentation does not include an in-page working demo.
====

== Basic setup

To add the {pluginname} plugin to the editor, add both `{plugincode}` to the `plugins` option in the editor configuration and the `ai_request` function to the editor configuration.

For example, interfacing with the OpenAI Completions API:

[source,js]
----
const api_key = '<INSERT_API_KEY_HERE>';

tinymce.init({
  selector: 'textarea',  // change this value according to your HTML
  plugins: 'ai',
  toolbar: 'aidialog aishortcuts',
  ai_request: (request, respondWith) => {
    const openAiOptions = {
      method: 'POST',
      headers: {
        'Content-Type': 'application/json',
        'Authorization': `Bearer ${api_key}`
      },
      body: JSON.stringify({
        model: 'gpt-3.5-turbo',
        temperature: 0.7,
        max_tokens: 800,
        messages: [{ role: 'user', content: request.prompt }],
      })
    };

>     respondWith.string((signal) => window.fetch('https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions', { signal, ...openAiOptions })
>       .then(async (response) => {
>         if (response.ok) {
>           return response.json();
>         } else {
>           return Promise.reject(`Failed to communicate with the OpenAI API. ${await response.text()}`);
>         }
>       })
>       .then((data) =>
>         data.error
>         ? Promise.reject(`Failed to communicate with the ChatGPT API because of ${data.error.type} error: ${data.error.message}`)
>         : data)
>       .then((data) =>
>         // Extract the response content from the data returned by the API
>         data?.choices[0]?.message?.content?.trim()
>       )
>     );

Reviewer 5: Not good practice to mix `then` with `async`/`await`, also removed final redundant then.
```suggestion
    respondWith.string((signal) => window.fetch('https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions', { signal, ...openAiOptions })
      .then((response) => response.ok ? response.json() : response.text())
      .then((data) => {
        if (typeof data === 'string') {
          Promise.reject(`Failed to communicate with the ChatGPT API. ${data}`);
        } else if (data.error) {
          Promise.reject(`Failed to communicate with the ChatGPT API because of ${data.error.type} error: ${data.error.message}`);
        } else {
          // Extract the response content from the data returned by the API
          return data?.choices[0]?.message?.content?.trim();
        }
      })
    );
```
